---
title: '02 - Reading text vs reaching out to video tutorials'
date: 2021-08-17
image: https://molekule.science/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/shutterstock_1019265877_reduced-1200x580.jpg 
comments: false
---

People use various forms of medium to consume information these days, be it reading a book, article, newspaper or listening to radio, podcasts or just straight watching tutorials off of youtube. Among all of these I have seen that a lot of people tend to fall towards watching tutorials to learn something new that they are interested in. In this article, I will mostly focus on the consumption of information from perspective of learning something new related to ones career or advancing knowledge and how this consumption of information in the form of tutorials is different than reading straight from text or original source.

In my case, ever since I have delved into the tech world and in my early days of high school, I myself was very much glued to learning via watching various videos and just following people out in youtube tutorials or other course lessons. But over the recent years I have lessen the amount of videos that I watch vs the amount of text that I read and I feel like reading the text or reaching out to the exact source is far more greater and richer in terms of attaining knowledge than to try to consume it from some kind of tutorial. But, by any means, I am not saying that trying to watching that great tutorial on C++ on youtube is bad or will harm your ability to learn something new, people have different ways of consuming information. But I am more so talking from the perspective of how I have changed my view over the years to reaching out to the exact source than trying to attain it from some kind of tutorial. Especially this is something I had observed from a collegue of mine, Mark(an awesome dev who I learnt a bunch of stuff from and to date I am very grateful to him), that he himself wasn't very much glued to the form of learning it via watching tutorials but rather straight reading from documentation and building something out of its own.

One of the main reason why reaching out to text it so powerful is because you skip so many step in between that which will eventually save your own time. For example, these days let's suppose I am trying to learn how to create a template or generic function in C++ and I try to watch a video on how to do there are several steps involved. First, I have to go to youtube and try to search for the term you are looking for. Once you have hit the search button you get presented with several choices to pick from. One may be long and the other maybe short, sometime you're not able to decide if one will be sufficient. Say you do find a one that will serve your need, you open it up but wait, now you have to wait for the 5 seconds ads and may possibly a couple other ads through out the video for you to interrupt. In the meantime this process has already wasted a couple minutes out of your time. Not only that but the key important thing in this whole exercise is that for most of the time your brain has been in a passive mode of trying to juggle thru to get exactly to what you want where as if you had went straight to the documentation or read an article you would have switched your brain automatically to an active mode to try to first understand the basic structure of the tempate or generics but also the various applications that it may provide. Once after that you will give time to your brain to think and internalize the various ways you can take this method and expand on how you want to use in your day to day. On the contrary, if you had still continued to watch the video it will make your thinking to be much more narrowed as the presenter tries to scopes to a specific chamber, which in one way you could argue that being a good thing because it's removing the noise. But you need to learn the art of removing noise yourself as you're discovering information. This will help in reading hard to read docs and be able to parse out hard docs that which may not be as easily discoverable. (TODO: find out some references aiding to the article)  

For us as developers, who are indulged in code day-in and day-out are actively seeking out solutions to our every day problems. Be it writing a small function to constructing a class to developing a whole solution for an idea. Often times whenever learning we get trapped into the idea of _watching_ a tutorial to get speed up on a certain technology. In the end, we end up watching one video after another but that has very minimal affect to our thinking and understanding of the technology. It's pros and cons, it's actual application to the problem, and it's actual use and adaptation to the context in which we're solving the problem. In essence, the video tutorial watching puts us into a passive mode vs an active mode where in which we directly consume and digest the information without taking a time to pause and reflect that which we would strive to do while reading the material. Reading the material gives us a way to actively engage with the content it doesn't naturally enforces us to **follow** the videos circle bar all the way to the end. Now to put it in perspective of programming in general whenever we're learning a new technology we mostly reach out by watching some kind of tutorial whereas I think it'd be far more fruiteful if we spend some time and attention actual trying to reason behind the design and how a certain piece of technology was put together. The real source of truth I find is the code itself that someone had written. What I find rewarding personally is just opening up the github pages(or gitlab, if you will) and trying to directly read out the source code. Try to find how the whole structure has been put together. Now clearly sometimes you'd feel overwhelmed and will not be able to connect the dots _but_ in returns that where you're truly engaging with the content with full focus and attention and therefore reading it much more actively vs passively. 

Therefore, over the years I have learned that reading text has much more advantages than trying to consume the same information with a different medium such as video streams and give us a moment to truly reflect on the content we're learning and may as well spark certain ideas that which we would have not imagined while being consumed in one narrow topic watching through a video tutorial.